---
title: 20230829124059
date: 2023-08-29 12:40:59 -07
customexcerpt: It seems that now, it's nearly impossible to know about niche things. Not because it's too hard, but because it's too easy. In other words, knowledge that used to be niche is now easily accessible.
---

It seems that now, it's nearly impossible to know about niche things. Not because it's too hard, but because it's too easy. In other words, knowledge that used to be niche is now easily accessible.

The reason is that any niche thing you know about is now covered on YouTube. So whether you know a niche thing is just whether you've watched a particular YouTube video.

My example: I remember learning that the original Roller Coaster Tycoon was programmed in assembly by a single guy. I have held onto this as a bizarre and fascinating nugget. I was recently suggested a YouTube video explaining this fact.

I am sure people felt this phenomenon about the Internet itself._\*_ But something about the explosion of knowledge on YouTube has made rare knowledge feel less valuable. Maybe it's because YouTube video makers are incentivized to make videos as engaging as possible. So acquiring niche knowledge used to be a function of whether you were sufficiently interested in something such that you would pass the activation energy required to look it up. People who weren't interested in it would never know about it because they would be too bored to tolerate the process of finding the information. But since YouTube videos are entertaining, this barrier no longer exists.

_\* Thinking more about this re: the Internet in general, it is certainly true. Going to a library and finding a book was a lot more effort than Googling something. I guess people probably felt the same about libraries. And writing._
