---
title: Bali
delaytitle: true
date: 2023-04-29
travel_start: 2022-12-17
travel_end: 2022-12-22
image: /assets/posts/2022-bali/IMG_0350.moz80.jpg
coverImage: /assets/posts/2022-bali/IMG_0350.moz80.jpg
customexcerpt: Every ounce of local kindness is a heroic feat in the face of Disneylandification.
attributions: The custom animated maps use map tiles by [Stamen Design](http://maps.stamen.com/) (CC BY 3.0). Country outline data from [DataHub](https://datahub.io/core/geo-countries) (PDDL), originally by [Natural Earth](https://www.naturalearthdata.com/) (public domain). Code to make the city maps is based off of [marceloprates/prettymaps](https://github.com/marceloprates/prettymaps/). Data for all maps &copy; OpenStreetMap contributors (ODbL).
---

<!-- image graveyard:

-->

<!-- Video list:

-->

{% include "maps/bali-maps.njk" %}

{% include "title.njk" %}

Final stop of the year before heading back for a Stateside intermission.

My stories from Bali are all aggressively banal:

1. Fruitlessly attempting another nonfiction on the Kindle, I listen to the reddening 50-something couple settled by me in the beach as they make small talk with the roving beach masseuse woman meticulously cleaning sand off the man's feet before she would oil and rub them.

1. I watch from the hotel as trash collecting machinery combs the beaches in front of the hotels. It gets a good haul.

1. We hike down to one of the _must see_ waterfalls on the island, passing by several Instagram-ready props and displays, made of the same kind of plastic and sub-Ikea material that seems standard worldwide, their flimsy ubiquity surpassing perhaps even _Live Laugh Love_ posters in AirBnbs. Top-40 pop dance music erupts cloyingly from the nearby restaurant, letting everyone know this is a fun time.

1. The Jordanian guy behind me in the white water rafting kayak keeps yelling _SNAKE_ to try to get a rise out of every other raft we pass. I desperately want him to even attempt to paddle in sync with the rest of us, though I couldn't tell you why.

1. Heavy, heavy traffic

1. I feel, at nearly all times, that every kind local (most are quite kind) is performing a heroic feat in the face of their home having irreversibly become another Disneyland

This leg is basically a vacation. So risking vacation photos, here's a brief montage.

{% img2 [
    [
        "/assets/posts/2022-bali/IMG_0343.moz80.jpg",
        "/assets/posts/2022-bali/IMG_0345.moz80.jpg"
    ],
    "/assets/posts/2022-bali/IMG_0346.moz80.jpg",
    "/assets/posts/2022-bali/IMG_0353.moz80.jpg",
    "/assets/posts/2022-bali/IMG_0356.moz80.jpg",
    "/assets/posts/2022-bali/IMG_0361.moz80.jpg",
    "/assets/posts/2022-bali/IMG_0367.moz80.jpg",
    "/assets/posts/2022-bali/IMG_0375.moz80.jpg",
    [
        "/assets/posts/2022-bali/IMG_2793.moz80.jpg",
        "/assets/posts/2022-bali/IMG_2785.moz80.jpg"
    ],
    "/assets/posts/2022-bali/IMG_0383.moz80.jpg",
    {"vimeoInfo": "820868963?h=696796d3a7", videoStyle: "width: 100%; aspect-ratio: 16 / 9;"}
] %}
