---
title: Lyon
date: 2022-08-07
travel_start: 2022-07-09
travel_end: 2022-07-13
image: /assets/posts/2022-france/lyon-city-river.moz80.jpg
attributions: Code to make the city maps is based off of [marceloprates/prettymaps](https://github.com/marceloprates/prettymaps/). Data for all maps &copy; OpenStreetMap contributors (ODbL).
---

{% cityMap "/assets/posts/2022-france/lyon-france-3-perimeter.moz80.jpg", false, true, false %}

{% cityPic "/assets/posts/2022-france/lyon-pano.moz80.jpg" %}

Lyon was my favorite French city we visited. I would love to go back.

The city is beautiful---w/ the river Rhône running right through it---and it's got truly lovely parks and amazing food.

{% img2 [
    [
        "/assets/posts/2022-france/lyon-apt.moz80.jpg",
        "/assets/posts/2022-france/lyon-infra-water.moz80.jpg"
    ],
    [
        "/assets/posts/2022-france/lyon-city-church-top.moz80.jpg",
        "/assets/posts/2022-france/lyon-big-church-outside.moz80.jpg"
    ],
    [
        "/assets/posts/2022-france/lyon-city-public-space-1.moz80.jpg",
        "/assets/posts/2022-france/lyon-city-public-space-2.moz80.jpg"
    ],
    [
        "/assets/posts/2022-france/lyon-big-church-inside.moz80.jpg",
        "/assets/posts/2022-france/lyon-city-church.moz80.jpg"
    ],
    [
        "/assets/posts/2022-france/lyon-park-spider-tree.moz80.jpg",
        "/assets/posts/2022-france/lyon-park-tall.moz80.jpg"
    ],
    [
        "/assets/posts/2022-france/lyon-city-river.moz80.jpg",
        "/assets/posts/2022-france/lyon-food.moz80.jpg"
    ]
] %}

{% doubleCaption null, "Quenelle Lyonnaise, a doughy white fish thing baked in this cream sauce."
%}

There were a bunch of shops near where we stayed that seemed like DIY craft spaces / teaching halls. This one (pictured below) is for making your own beer. We also saw ones for pottery, clothes making, and painting.

It made me think a bit about the value of having places for artists, and how challenging this is to maintain when a city gets really expensive, and how sad it is when that fails (see, e.g., Seattle for all of the above).

I have no reason to believe that Lyon has solved this issue. But seeing how many places there were for newbies to take classes made me wonder about that as a model for providing income and studio space for practitioners.

{% img2 [[
    "/assets/posts/2022-france/lyon-diy-beer-2.moz80.jpg",
    "/assets/posts/2022-france/lyon-infra-rail-lighting.moz80.jpg"
]] %}

{% doubleCaption
    "Aforementioned DIY beer studio.",
    "Random cool infrastructure thing: lights built into the underside of hand rails."
%}

A tiny bit about taking pictures.

I have no photography training (as I am sure you can easily tell from looking at this blog), so I sometimes feel like I'm slowly learning by doing everything wrong.

E.g., I noticed that all of my photos of this big Lyon park (_Parc de la Tête d'Or_) look... I don't know, somehow off. Like the lighting is bad. Which is weird, because the sun was extremely bright, and there was like no cloud cover. I think I had a similar problem in [Crete](/posts/2022-crete/).

My recent thought: I wonder if direct overhead lighting is bad? It's like, "too harsh," or something like that? Maybe it's good to have shadowed areas that are more horizontal than vertical?

{% img2 [[
    "/assets/posts/2022-france/lyon-park-water.moz80.jpg",
    "/assets/posts/2022-france/lyon-roman-concert.moz80.jpg"
]] %}

{% doubleCaption
    "Aforementioned weird lighting in a beautiful park. Perhaps sun too overhead?",
    "Lyon did something cool with Roman ruins: kept them and modernized them as a concert space. So you can attend a concert in an ancient Roman ampitheater. Way to go, guys. Apparently the Romans had also built a 90-ft tall wall behind the stage to... block off the whole amazing view of the city? Good call tearing that thing down."
%}

## Photographing Art

I have two modes in museums:

1. Not photographing anything. Looking down at people who take photographs. "Just enjoy the art!" I think to myself. How foolish they are.
2. Photographing a bunch of stuff. "I want to remember, to be inspired later!" I think.

It's really impressive how bad the photos always are. In fact, they rarely even remind me what was so good about a piece.

To me, it's quite surprising that this is the case. You'd think, an image is an image, right? The scale and texture and physicality really matters, though, I think. Not to mention the whole designated space / mood for looking at them. Plus the context of an exhibition.

Anyway here's a few I took and some light commentary.

{% img2 [[
    "/assets/posts/2022-france/lyon-art-balance.moz80.jpg",
    "/assets/posts/2022-france/lyon-art-photo.moz80.jpg"
]] %}

{% doubleCaption
    "Set table all balanced on wood poles, no adhesive, quite high up (20ft? see distortion on right corner).",
    "This is a prime example of photo not capturing what I liked about the piece. The piece is printed on some special material... maybe layered enamel? The way light passed through the image just had beautiful optics to it. Rendered as a photo, it just looks muddy."
%}

{% img2 [[
    "/assets/posts/2022-france/lyon-art-tiny-many.moz80.jpg",
    "/assets/posts/2022-france/lyon-art-tiny-one.moz80.jpg"
]] %}

{% doubleCaption
    "Teensy matchbox-sized paintings.",
    "Close-up of one. Amount of detail/sq.in. is staggering."
%}

So anyway I will resume omitting museum / art gallery photos now.
